Saudi oil attacks an 'act of war' by Iran, not Yemen rebels, Pompeo claims

closeVideoU.S. and Saudi forensic teams have been collecting and analyzing the
remains of weapons that were used in the attack; chief White House
correspondent John Roberts reports.

U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Wednesday doubled down on accusations
Iran is responsible for the weekend bombing on Saudi Arabia’s oil facilities,
telling reporters that the strike was “an act of war.”





Pompeo, speaking from Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, added that even if the
"fraudulent claims" of responsibility by the Yemen Houthi rebels were true, "it
doesn't change the fingerprints of the  [Iran Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei] as having put at risk the global energy supply."



His comments come hours after President Trump tweeted that he had ordered
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to “substantially increase sanctions” on
Iran, amid escalating tensions between the two countries.



Earlier this week, Trump said it was "looking like" Iran was responsible for
the bombing but did not publically accuse Tehran of the attack.



“Well, it’s looking that way,” the president told reporters at the White House
on Monday when asked if Iran was responsible. “We’ll let you know
definitively.” He added: “That’s being checked out right now.”

Iran, who has repeatedly denied involvement in the bombings, warned Wednesday
that it would "immediately" retaliate against the United States if Tehran is
targeted over a crippling weekend attack on Saudi oil facilities.

The threat, which was sent via the Swiss Embassy in Tehran, also condemned
previous remarks made by Secretary Pompeo and other high-ranking U.S. officials
suggesting Iran was behind the move.



“Iran’s response will be prompt and strong, and it may include broader areas
than the source of attacks,” Iran’s Mehr News Agency reported.

Tehran’s Fars News Agency added that any response would be “rapid and crushing.”

Meanwhile, Saudi officials alleged on Wednesday that Iranian cruise missiles
and drones were behind the attack on Sunday, showing journalists remains of the
weapons. However, they stopped short of directly accusing Iran of launching the
assault.

Saudi military spokesman Col. Turki al-Malki said the attack "came from the
north," without saying specifically where it originated. Iraq and Iran are to
the north of Saudi Arabia across the Persian Gulf.

"The attack could not have originated from Yemen," he said, disputing the claim
by Yemen's Iranian-backed Houthi rebels that they launched the weapons.


      Remains of what was described as a misfired Iranian cruise missile used
in an attack this weekend that targeted the heart of Saudi Arabia's oil
industry, is displayed during a press conference by Saudi military spokesman
Col. Turki al-Malki, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Wednesday, Sept. 18, 2019. Though
Yemen's Houthi rebels claimed the assault, the U.S. alleges Iran was behind it.
(AP Photo/Amr Nabil)
      

Saudi officials said the cruise missile, which had what appeared to be a jet
engine attached to it, was a land-attack cruise missile that failed to explode.

"Almost certainly it's Iranian-backed," Prince Khalid bin Bandar, Saudi
Arabia's ambassador to the United Kingdom, told the BBC. "We are trying not to
react too quickly because the last thing we need is more conflict in the
region."

Cmdr. Joshua Frey, a spokesman for the U.S. Navy's 5th Fleet, declined to
comment on the Saudi announcement, saying it "would be inappropriate to comment
on the status of individual nations and the nature of any potential support."


      Journalists film what Saudi military spokesman Col. Turki al-Malki said
was evidence of Iranian weaponry used in the attack targeted Saudi Aramco's
facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais, during a press conference in Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia, Wednesday, Sept. 18, 2019. (AP Photo/Amr Nabil)
      



Iran’s state-run news agency also reported that the country’s president and the
foreign minister may not be able to attend next week’s high-level meetings at
the United Nations because the U.S. has yet to issue them valid visas.

As the host of the U.N.'s headquarters, the U.S. is mandated to offer world
leaders and diplomats visas to attend meetings there. But as tensions have
risen, the U.S. has put increasing restrictions on Iranians like Iranian
Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Zarif. Since becoming Iran's president in 2013,
Hassan Rouhani has spoken each year at the General Assembly.

Video

The U.N. meeting had been viewed as an opportunity for direct talks between
Rouhani and Trump amid of a summer of heightened tensions and attacks in the
wake of America’s unilateral withdrawal from Iran’s nuclear deal with world
powers a year ago.



However, the likelihood of such talks decreased dramatically following the
Saudi oil attack, U.S. accusations that Iran was behind it and hardening
comments from Iran. Yemen’s Iranian-backed Houthi rebels have claimed the
attack was in response to the Saudi-led war in Yemen, which has sparked the
world’s worst humanitarian crisis and killed tens of thousands of people.

Iran sent a note through Swiss diplomats in Tehran on Monday, reiterating that
Tehran denies being involved in the Saudi attack, IRNA reported. The Swiss have
looked after American interests in Tehran for decades.

Pompeo is traveling to Saudi Arabia for meetings after Saturday's attack, which
hit a Saudi oil field and the world's largest crude oil processing plant.



The coalition aims to secure the broader Persian Gulf region. It includes
surveillance of the Strait of Hormuz, the narrow mouth of the Persian Gulf
through which a fifth of the world's oil travels, and the Bab el-Mandeb,
another narrow strait that connects the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden off Yemen
and East Africa.

Video

The U.S. blames Iran for the apparent limpet mine explosions on four vessels in
May and another two in June sailing in the Gulf of Oman near the Strait of
Hormuz, something Iran denies being behind. Iran also seized a British-flagged
oil tanker and another based in the United Arab Emirates after the British
seized a tanker carrying Iranian oil.



In Tehran, Rouhani told his Cabinet that Saudi Arabia should see the weekend
attack as a warning to end its war in Yemen, where it has fought the Houthi
rebels since 2015 and sought to restore the internationally recognized
government.

Rouhani said Yemenis "did not hit hospitals, they did not hit schools or the
Sanaa bazaar," referring to the Saudi-led coalition's widely criticized
airstrikes on civilian targets.

He added that Iran does not want conflict in the region, but it was the
Saudi-led coalition that "waged the war in the region and ruined Yemen." Saying
the Houthis were responsible for the drone strikes, he said: "They attacked an
industrial center to warn you. Learn the lesson from the warning."

Iran's defense minister, Gen. Amir Hatami, also denied his country launched the
attack, saying the Houthis had the capability to launch the assault.

Video

Wednesday's announcements come after Saudi Arabia's energy minister said late
Tuesday that more than half of the country's daily crude oil production that
was knocked out by an attack had been recovered. He said production capacity at
the targeted plants would be fully restored by the end of the month, in part by
drawing from Saudi reserves of crude oil.

Pompeo was due to land in the Red Sea city of Jiddah, where he was scheduled to
meet with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. Pompeo will later travel to
the United Arab Emirates on Thursday to meet with Abu Dhabi's powerful crown
prince, Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. Both nations are U.S. allies and
have been fighting against the Houthis in Yemen.

Marine Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Tuesday
that U.S. military experts were in Saudi Arabia working with their counterparts
to "do the forensics on the attack" -- gleaning evidence that could help build
a convincing case for where the weapons originated.


      A Saudi military officer walks by what was described asa the remains of
Iranian cruise missiles and drones used in an attack this weekend that targeted
the heart of Saudi Arabia's oil industry, during a press conference by military
spokesman Col. Turki al-Malki in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Wednesday, Sept. 18,
2019. Though Yemen's Houthi rebels claimed the assault, the U.S. alleges Iran
was behind it. (AP Photo/Amr Nabil)
      



On Wednesday, French President Emmanuel Macron's office announced experts from
his nation would be traveling to Saudi Arabia to help the kingdom shed light
"on the origin and methods" of the attacks. France has been trying to find a
diplomatic solution to the tensions between Iran and the U.S., so any
conclusion they draw could be used as a third-party assessment of what happened.





